# Automatic Code Generation (Experimental)

This folder holds YAML configuration data for code generation. Code generation uses
output of the *doxygen* utility for information on function declarations as well as
documentation. The collected information represents annotated CLib functions that form
the basis for specific APIs generated by *sourcegen*.

## YAML Specification Files

Each file contains information for CLib headers that implement functions and methods
built around a specific Cantera class. The following fields are supported:

- `docstring`: Used as part of the docstring of the auto-generated API file.
- `prefix`: Prefix used for CLib functions.
- `base`: Base class of the CLib library; examples: `Solution`, `ThermoPhase`.
    Stand-alone functions defined in the `Cantera` namespace use `""` as a base.
- `parents`: List of class parents; used to locate C++ methods (default: `[]`).
- `derived`: List of derived classes; used to locate C++ methods (default: `[]`).
- `recipes`: List of CLib *recipes* (see below).

The *sourcegen* utility implements logic to automatically detect CLib functions types
based on a recipe, which is subsequently used to scaffold API functions using dedicated
*Jinja* templates. The following recipe/CLib function types are differentiated:

- `function`: Regular function defined in the `Cantera` namespace.
- `constructor`: A CLib constructor adds new (or existing) C++ objects to CLib storage.
    As all objects are handled via smart `shared_ptr<>`, a CLib constructor requires a
    C++ utility functions that returning a pointer to a new object or an object that is
    not yet added to CLib storage. Constructor names should start with `new`.
- `destructor`: A CLib destructor removes a C++ object from CLib. Destructor names
    should start with `del`.
- `getter`: Implements a getter method of a C++ class.
- `setter`: Implements a setter method of a C++ class.
- `method`: Generic method of a C++ class.
- `noop`: No operation.
- `reserved`: Reserved (hard-coded) CLib functions which include service functions for
    CLib storage (examples: `cabinetSize`, `parentHandle`) or functions that do not have
    a C++ equivalent (example: `getCanteraError`).

## YAML Recipes

Recipes include all information required for the auto-generation of a corresponding
CLib function. Each recipe uses the following fields:

- `name`: Name of the CLib function to be generated (without prefix).
- `implements`: Optional name or signature of the implemented C++ function/method. If
    left empty, *sourcegen* searches for doxygen tags matching the `name` field.
    A qualified name is sufficient if C++ functions/methods are unique, for example
    `Func1::type`. A full signature is required whenever shortened signatures with
    default arguments are used and/or multiple C++ function/method variants exist, for
    example `Phase::moleFraction(size_t)`.
- `uses`: Optional list of auxiliary C++ class methods used by the CLib function. The
    exact usage depends on the type of the implemented CLib function.
- `what`: Optional override for auto-detected recipe/CLib function type.
- `brief`: Optional override for brief description from doxygen documentation.
- `code`: Optional custom code to override auto-generated code.
