.TH "ck2cti" 1 "4 Jun 2012" "ck2cti" \" -*- nroff -*-
.ad l
.nh
.SH NAME
ck2cti \- convert Chemkin-II-format mechanisms to Cantera input files (.cti)

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ck2cti
--input=\fImech-file\fR
[--thermo=\fIthermo-file\fR]
[--transport=\fItransport-file\fR]
[--id=\fIphase-id\fR]
[--output=\fIout-file\fR]
[-d | --debug]

.SH DESCRIPTION

.I ck2cti
converts a Chemkin-II-format reaction mechanism file to Cantera input
format.  The resulting Cantera input file contains a definition of one
.B ideal_gas
entry that represents an ideal gas mixture corresponding to the
Chemkin-II reaction mechanism. The file also contains Cantera-format
definitions for each species and each reaction in the input reaction
mechanism file.  The Cantera-format mechanism is written to 
.I out-file

The parameters are as follows:
.TP
.B --input=\fImech-file\fR
Chemkin-II reaction mechanism file to be converted. Required. This
file must contain the declarations of the elements and species, as
well as the reactions (if any). It may also contain the thermodyamic
and transport data.
.TP
.B --thermo=\fIthermo-file\fR
Thermodynamic property database. If the THERMO section of the input
file is missing or does not have entries for one or more species, this
file will be searched for the required thermo data.
.TP
.B --transport=\fItransport-file\fR
Transport property database. If this file name is supplied, transport
property parameters will be taken from this file and included in the
output Cantera-format file. If this parameter is omitted, and no
TRANSPORT section was included in the main input file, no transport
property parameters will be included in the output.
.TP
.B --id=\fIphase-id\fR
Optional identification string, used to set the \fIid\fR field of the
\fBideal_gas\fR entry in the Cantera-format output. If this parameter
is omitted, it will be set to
.B gas

.SH EXAMPLE
ck2cti --input=chem.inp --thermo=therm.dat --transport=tran.dat
