# Auto-Generated CLib API

```{caution}
The auto-generated CLib API is an experimental part of Cantera and may be changed
without notice.
```

In CLib, Cantera objects are stored and referenced by integers - no pointers are passed
to or from the calling application. Further, the contents of arrays and variables are
copied, which separates internal C++ memory management from the application using CLib.

**Example:** Cantera implements a method to retrieve molecular weights in C++ as the
{ct}`Phase::getMolecularWeights` class method, which is accessible from the derived C++
{ct}`ThermoPhase` class. The CLib source generator expands a corresponding
`getMolecularWeights` entry:

```yaml
- name: getMolecularWeights
  uses: nSpecies
```

in the [Header Specification File](sec-sourcegen-specifications) `ctthermo_auto.yaml`
into a CLib header within a generated `ctthermo3.h` file:

```c
/**
 *  Copy the vector of molecular weights into array weights.
 *
 *  @param handle       Handle to queried Phase object.
 *  @param[out] weightsLen Length of array reserved for weights.
 *  @param weights      Output array of molecular weights (kg/kmol)
 *
 *  @implements getter: void Phase::getMolecularWeights(double*)
 *  @relates Phase::nSpecies()
 */
int thermo3_getMolecularWeights(int handle, int weightsLen, double* weights);
```

and an associated CLib implementation within a generated `ctthermo3.cpp` file:

```c
int thermo3_getMolecularWeights(int handle, int weightsLen, double* weights)
{
    // getter: void Phase::getMolecularWeights(double*)
    try {
        auto obj = ThermoPhaseCabinet::as<Phase>(handle);
        if (weightsLen < obj->nSpecies()) {
            throw ArraySizeError("thermo3_getMolecularWeights", weightsLen, obj->nSpecies());
        }
        obj->getMolecularWeights(weights);
        return 0;
    } catch (...) {
        return handleAllExceptions(-1, ERR);
    }
}
```

When generating code, the CLib source generator uses the docstring of the original C++
code in combination with "crosswalks" of type information as described in
the [](sec-sourcegen-clib-details).

(sec-sourcegen-clib-install)=
## Building the Auto-Generated CLib Interface

Before generating the CLib interface, ensure that an up-to-date Doxygen XML tree is
available. You can generate it by running:

```bash
scons doxygen
```

In a next step, the sourcegen command line interface is installed by:

```bash
python -m pip install -e interfaces/sourcegen
```

Finally, the CLib interface is then generated by running the following command from the
root folder of the Cantera source code:

```bash
sourcegen --api=clib --output=.
```

The CLib source generator injects the generated code directly into the Cantera source
folder by adding header files to `include/cantera/clib_experimental` and implementation
files to `src/clib_experimental`. The auto-generated CLib API becomes an integral part
of Cantera's shared libraries after compiling Cantera with the option:

```bash
scons build clib_experimental=y
```

## CLib Source Generator Overview

The CLib source generator follows the generic layout of sourcegen's
[automated code generation](sec-sourcegen-details), with all code located in
the `interfaces/sourcegen/src/sourcegen/clib` folder. While the overall configuration
follows available [](sourcegen-config), the CLib source generator introduces additional
configuration options.

### Configuration

The YAML file `config.yaml` within the `clib` folder contains configuration options
specific to the CLib interface. Configuration options are static unless new CLib
modules need to be implemented (see section [](sec-sourcegen-clib-extend)).

- **Generic Options:** As the CLib interface follows directly from
  [](sec-sourcegen-specifications), override options defined by `ignore_files` and
  `ignore_funcs` are not needed. While the options are available, they should only be
  used for testing purposes and otherwise be left at their default values (empty).

- **Type Crosswalks:** These fields map CLib types to their C++ equivalents.

    - `ret_type_crosswalk`: Specifies the types returned by CLib functions and methods.
    - `prop_type_crosswalk`: Specifies the types passed as parameters in CLib functions
      and methods.

- **CLib-Specific Options:** These fields define options specific to the CLib interface
  and use base class names defined within the C++ Cantera namespace. Functions defined
  within Cantera's root namespace use `""` as the class name:

    - `preambles`: A mapping of class names to associated text blocks for preambles
      (headers).
    - `includes`: A mapping of class names to lists of C++ includes defining base
      classes and associated specializations.

(sec-sourcegen-clib-details)=
### Implementation Details

- **Templates for Scaffolding:** Templates, powered by
  [Jinja](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com), are used to scaffold elements of the CLib
  API. The following files define these templates:

    - `templates.yaml`: Defines code blocks within the header and implementation files.
    - `template_header.h.in`: Defines the template for header files.
    - `template_source.cpp.in`: Defines the template for implementation files.

- **Source Code:** The implementation of the CLib source generator is contained in
  `generator.py`.

(sec-sourcegen-clib-extend)=
## Extending the CLib API

Sourcegen uses a one-to-one correspondence of YAML configuration files to C++ base
classes; derived classes are handled by the same configuration as the base class.

- **New Methods for Existing Configurations:** Add the name of the method as a new
  recipe; the new CLib function will become available once CLib is regenerated and
  Cantera is recompiled/reinstalled.

- **YAML Configuration for a C++ Base Class:** The CLib source generator implements
  templates for C++ interface patterns commonly used by Cantera.

  Follow the following steps for new classes and associated methods:

  1. Add a new YAML configuration file as described in [](sourcegen-config).
  1. Add include files specifying base class and specializations to the `includes`
     mapping in `config.yaml`.
  1. Regenerate the CLib interface and recompile/reinstall Cantera.
  1. Add new unit tests in `test/clib_experimental` to ensure that the new feature is
     working properly.

## Troubleshooting

The **sourcegen** utility uses a logging module to provide feedback. Add the verbose
`-v` option to generate additional feedback.

- *Missing XML tree:* The sourcegen utility requires a valid doxygen tag file and an
  associated XML tree, which are generated by running `scons doxygen`.

  ```shell
  [CRITICAL] Tag file does not exist at expected location:
      <...>/cantera/build/doc/Cantera.tag
  Run 'scons doxygen' to generate.
  ```

- *Invalid function/method name:* The function/method name is not known to doxygen;
  check spelling and/or re-run `scons doxygen` if the function/method was recently
  created.

  ```shell
  [CRITICAL] Could not find '...' in doxygen tag file.
  ```

- *Missing docstring:* Cantera's doxygen configuration skips undocumented functions and
  methods; thus, they are not part of the XML tree and cannot be resolved by sourcegen.

  ```shell
  [CRITICAL] Unable to resolve recipe type for '...'
  ```

- *Ambiguous Signature:* Functions and methods that have overloads and/or define default
  arguments require disambiguation via the `implements` field.

  ```shell
  [CRITICAL] Need argument list to disambiguate '...'.
  Possible matches are:
   - (double, double, const double*)
   - (double, double, const Composition&)
   - (double, double, const string&)
  ```

- *Missing Crosswalk:* The CLib code generator is limited to type crosswalks
  defined `config.yaml`.

  ```shell
  [CRITICAL] Failed crosswalk for argument type '...'.
  [CRITICAL] Failed crosswalk for return type '...'.
  ```

  A resolution will require one of the two options:

  1. Create alternative C++ functions/methods with signatures that are compatible with
     existing crosswalks.
  1. Add new crosswalks to `config.yaml`, which may require updates of templates as
     well as the CLib source generator source code itself.
