#summary Description of the Liquid Transport Branch


==Description==

Liquid transport branch includes an attempt to formulate transport parameters for liquid systems. Currently, cantera has a solid representation of transport within dilute gas systems and within porous flow of gases. This branch is used to create models for transport through liquids, primarily charged liquids.

Existing Liquid Transport has implementations of the Stefan-Maxwell equations for liquids, specifically molten salts, which have been validated against experimental data. And it also has an implementation of general liquid transport using simple functional formulations for the transport parameters.

==Merge plans==

We will be merging back the Liquid Transport back into the main branch at the earliest time after the following work has been done or assurances met.

  * Compiles on all supported platforms
  * Existing Matlab interface is sound
  * Existing Python interface is sound
  * Documentation of the capabilities within: 
    # Doxygen
    # memos with the equation formulation
    # sample problems in the extended test suite


There is still a lot to do with formulating liquid transport models for brines and electrolyte systems used in batteries that are on the development list. So, I don’t think we can close out the branch. However, we’ll limit it to transport development from now on.
Additionally, there are a lot of fixes and minor development that have ended up there by default. This is ending; bug fixes will be going onto the main development branch. The idea here is to clearly identify commits as either bug fixes or development efforts. If they are development efforts, they should be identified development efforts with project plans.