.TH "ck2yaml" 1 "6 Feb 2021" "ck2yaml" \" -*- nroff -*-
.ad l
.nh
.SH NAME
ck2yaml \- convert Chemkin-II-format mechanisms to Cantera YAML input files

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ck2yaml
[--input=<filename>]
[--thermo=<filename>]
[--transport=<filename>]
[--surface=<filename>]
[--name=<name>]
[--extra=<filename>]
[--output=<filename>]
[--permissive]
[--quiet]
[--no-validate]
[-d | --debug]

.SH DESCRIPTION

.I ck2yaml
converts a Chemkin-II-format reaction mechanism file to Cantera input
format.  The resulting Cantera input file contains phase definitions,
species definitions, and reaction definitions, depending on the inputs
provided. The Cantera-format mechanism is written to the file named by
\fIoutput\fR.

The parameters are as follows:
.TP
.B --input=\fIfilename\fR
Chemkin-II gas-phase reaction mechanism file to be converted. This file
contains the declarations of the elements and species, as
well as the reactions (if any). It may also contain the thermodynamic
and transport data.
.TP
.B --thermo=\fIfilename\fR
Thermodynamic property database. If the input file does not have a
THERMO section, or does not have entries for one or more species, this
file will be searched for the required thermo data. A YAML file
containing only species definitions (which can be referenced from
phase definitions in other input files) can be created by specifying
a \fIthermo\fR file with no \fIinput\fR file.
.TP
.B --transport=\fIfilename\fR
Transport property database. If this file name is supplied, transport
property parameters will be taken from this file and included in the
output Cantera-format file. If this parameter is omitted, and no
TRANSPORT section was included in the main input file, no transport
property parameters will be included in the output.
.TP
.B --surface=\fIfilename\fR
Surface phase definition. If this file name is supplied, an additional
phase entry for a surface phase will be read from this file, and a
\fIreactions\fR section will be created for any surface reactions
defined in this file.
.TP
.B --name=\fIname\fR
Optional identification string, used to set the \fIname\fR of the
\fIideal-gas\fR phase in the Cantera-format output. If this parameter
is omitted, it will be set to \fBgas\fR.
.TP
.B --extra=\fIfilename\fR
This option takes a YAML file as input. It can be used to add to the
file description, or to define custom fields that are included in the
YAML output.
.TP
.B --output=\fIfilename\fR
If the output file name is not given, an output file will be created
with the same name as the input file, with the extension changed to
\fB.yaml\fR.
.TP
.B --permissive
Allows certain recoverable parsing errors (e.g. duplicate transport
data) to be ignored.
.TP
.B --quiet
Disables all non-error output, for use in batch processing.
.TP
.B --no-validate
Disables validation of the converted mechanism by importing it from
the Cantera Python module.
.TP
.B -d | --debug
Enables additional debugging output.

.SH EXAMPLE
ck2yaml --input=chem.inp --thermo=therm.dat --transport=tran.dat
