.TH LXCAT2YAML 1 "2025" "Cantera" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
lxcat2yaml \- Convert LXCat integral cross-section data to YAML format
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B lxcat2yaml
[\fB-h\fR]
[\fB--input\fR \fIINPUT\fR]
[\fB--database\fR \fIDATABASE\fR]
[\fB--mech\fR \fIMECH\fR]
[\fB--phase\fR \fIPHASE\fR]
[\fB--insert\fR]
[\fB--output\fR \fIOUTPUT\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Convert the LXCat integral cross-section data in XML format (LXCATML) to YAML format.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show this help message and exit.
.TP
.BI \-\-input " INPUT"
LXCat electron-collision cross sections input file, containing a list of the
electron-collision plasma reactions with the electron energy levels and
corresponding cross sections. Must be specified.
.TP
.BI \-\-database " DATABASE"
The name of the database. Optional. Use it when multiple databases exist in
the input file.
.TP
.BI \-\-mech " MECH"
Cantera yaml-format reaction mechanism file. The list of the species is used
as the filter to determine which electron-collision reactions in the input
file are parsed. In addition, the electron-collision reactions can be inserted
automatically into the mechanism file with the argument \fB--insert\fR and
become the output file.
.TP
.BI \-\-phase " PHASE"
This specifies the name of the phase in the mechanism file. Optional.
.TP
.B \-\-insert
Enable inserting the electron-collision reactions into the mechanism file.
Need to use with the argument \fB--mech\fR to provide the mechanism file.
Optional.
.TP
.BI \-\-output " OUTPUT"
Specifies the OUTPUT file name. By default, the output file name is the input
file name with the extension changed to \fB.yaml\fR.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Basic usage with database and mechanism insertion:
.PP
.nf
.RS
lxcat2yaml --input=mycs.xml --database=itikawa --mech=oxygen-plasma.yaml \\
           --phase=isotropic-electron-energy-plasma --insert \\
           --output=oxygen-itikawa-plasma.yaml
.RE
.fi
.PP
If the \fBlxcat2yaml\fR script is not on your path but the Cantera Python
module is, \fBlxcat2yaml\fR can also be invoked by running:
.PP
.nf
.RS
python -m cantera.lxcat2yaml --input=mycs.xml
.RE
.fi
.PP
In both cases, the equal signs in the options are optional. In the second
case, the xml file is converted to yaml without inserting the collision
reactions into the mechanism file.
.SH SEE ALSO
Cantera documentation at https://cantera.org
