.TH "yaml2ck" 1 "12 Aug 2022" "yaml2ck" \" -*- nroff -*-
.ad l
.nh
.SH NAME
yaml2ck \- convert Cantera YAML input files to Chemkin-format mechanisms

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B yaml2ck [\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fIINPUT\fR

.SH DESCRIPTION

.I yaml2ck
converts a Cantera YAML input file to Chemkin-format reaction mechanism.

The parameters are as follows:
.TP
.B \fIINPUT\fR
Cantera YAML input file to be converted. This file contains the declarations
of the elements and species, thermodynamic data, as well as the reactions
and transport data (if any).
.TP
.B --phase-name=\fIPHASE\fR
Name of the phase to load from the input. If unspecified, the first phase
listed in the input file will be loaded.
.TP
.B --mechanism=\fIMECH\fR
The path to the output mechanism file. Optional. If not provided, the name
of the input file will be used, with the extension replaced by '.ck'. If
the path specified here is an existing directory, the output file(s) will
be placed in that directory.
.TP
.B --thermo=\fITHERM\fR
The path to the output thermodynamics database file. Optional. If not
provided, the thermodynamic data will be included in the mechanism file.
.TP
.B --transport=\fITRAN\fR
The path to the output transport database file. Optional. If not provided,
transport data will be included in the mechanism file.
.TP
.B --sort-elements=\fIOPTION\fR
Sort elements in source order (None, default), alphabetically (alphabetical),
or from lowest to highest atomic mass (molar-mass).
.TP
.B --sort-species=\fIOPTION\fR
Sort species in source order (None, default), alphabetically (alphabetical),
or from lowest to highest atomic mass (molar-mass).
.TP
.B --overwrite, --no-overwrite
If set, overwrite existing output files. (default: False)
.TP
.B --validate, --no-validate
Check that the mechanism can be loaded back into Cantera. (default: True)
.TP
.B -h | --help
Show the help message and exit.

.SH EXAMPLE
yaml2ck --mechanism=chem.inp --thermo=therm.dat chem.yaml
