.TH "ck2cti" 1 "16 Nov 2003" "ck2cti" \" -*- nroff -*-
.ad l
.nh
.SH NAME
ck2cti \- convert a Chemkin-II-format reaction mechanism file to Cantera input format.  

.SH SYNOPSIS
.br
ck2cti \fB-i \fIinput \fR[\fB-t \fIthermo\fR] \fR[\fB-tr\fI transport\fR] 
\fR[\fB-id\fI idtag\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION

.I ck2cti
converts a Chemkin-II-format reaction mechanism file to Cantera input
format.  The resulting Cantera input file contains a definition of one
.B ideal_gas
entry that represents an ideal gas mixture corresponding to the
Chemkin-II reaction mechanism. The file also contains Cantera-format
definitions for each species and each reaction in the input reaction
mechanism file.  The Cantera-format text is written to the standard
output.

The parameters are as follows:
.TP
.I input
Chemkin-II reaction mechanism file to be converted. Required.
.TP
.I thermo
Thermodynamic property database. If the THERMO section of the input
file is missing or does not have entries for one or more species, this
file will be searched for the required thermo data. This file may be
another reaction mechanism file containing a THERMO section, or a
Chemkin-II-compatible thermodynamic database file.
.TP
.I transport
Transport property database. If this file name is supplied, transport
property parameters will be taken from this file and included in the
output Cantera-format file. If this parameter is omitted, no transport
property parameters will be included in the output.
.TP
.I id
Identification string. The \fBideal_gas\fR entry in the Cantera-format
output has name \fIid\fR. If this parameter is omitted, it will be set
to the input file name without the extension. Since only one phase
definition is present in the \fIck2cti\fR output, this parameter is
not required.

.SH EXAMPLES

Create a Cantera input file from a self-contained Chemkin-format file 
without transport parameters:
.TP
ck2cti -i mech.inp > mech.cti
.TP
Create a Cantera input file from a Chemkin-format file that requires a
separate thermodynamic database
without transport parameters:
.TP
ck2cti -i mech.inp -t therm.dat > mech.cti
.TP
Create a Cantera input file from a Chemkin-format file that requires a
separate thermodynamic database and include transport parameters:
.TP
ck2cti -i mech.inp -t therm.dat -tr tran.dat > mech.cti
